Forms are one of the most important parts of a website because it captures information from users, sends a request to the back-end for further data processing.

You can construct a basic using the <form> tags to enclose one or several <input> elements, and those <input> elements may have a range of different applications from typing in an e-mail, to a password input box, to a searchbox, among other functions. Usually at the end of a form, a submit button is issued through an <input> element by specifying its type. <input> elements are self-contained meaning that they don't need to wrap around other content and uses only one tag to define it.

You can specify the URL to which the form is submitted using the action attribute in the opening tag of a <form> element. The value of the action attribute must be equal to the destination URL to which the submitted form is sent to.

A <form> element has many child elements, primarily <input> is the most important and can indicate a field for text, e-mail, radio button, checkbox, a phone number, date, time, url, those are most visually apparent on mobile phones and are often assigned as values for the type attribute of an <input> element. <textarea> is another element that defines a text box within the form. <textarea> element isn't self-closing unlike <input> elements, meaning they could wrap around content to display within them, and they require both opening and closing tags. A <select> element also requires both tags and encloses its child <option> elements. Each <option> element must have a value attribute with a specific value signifying its value, they also require both tags. A <select> element can have a multiple Boolean attribute to define that multiple options can be selected. You can also hide <input> elements by typing in a value of hidden in its type attribute, or a button by using submit as its type attribute value, or finally use the file value as its type to define that the user should upload a certain file. Within a <form> you find the <label> element which also isn't self-closing. It's displayed inline and wraps its content and usually precedes whichever <input> it's supposed to label. A <fieldset> element groups the form as a block element like a <section> or <div> element, it isn't self-closing either and precedes <label> elements. Moreover a <legend> element wraps its content and is located right after the <fieldset> element and before the <label> element. It defines a heading or a caption for the form. A <button> element can also exist within a <form> to define a submit button. In HTML5, an <output> element was added that is used to output a result of a calculation.

Within the opening <form> tag, a method attribute is specified and can have one of two values, either GET or POST. POST value should be used when dealing with sensitive information or submissions as the requests aren't cached as opposed to GET, which caches requests. Meaning that GET method shows the submitted information in the URL, making it accessible whilst POST one is secure and therefore doesn't.

When you want to select multiple options, then checkboxes should be used instead of radio buttons as they allow for multiple selections.

A dropdown menu should be used when there are too many options for radio buttons or checkboxes, they're used to give the user a better overview of the possible selections instead of scanning through a large number of radio buttons or checkboxes.

To create a large text field, you would add the rows and cols attributes within the opening <textarea> tag with whichever numerical values desired to make the text field as big as needed.

Elements can be linked with labels by nesting them within a <label> element, which defines the name or label of a <form> element, they're then linked to the their respective <form> elements through adding a for attribute within the opening <label> tag with a value matching the id value for its linked element. The for attribute must match the id value not the name attribute for them to be linked, the name attribute is required for back-end purposes and for the <form> element to be recognized when submitted.

By having a common value for the name attribute of element selections, they are then linked and thus nicely formatted when they're submitted to the server.

A submit button should probably say send, next, finish instead of submit. It largely depends on the context of the form.
