Internal links have relative paths leading to a file on the same site, with the linked file usually present on the same site, sometimes in a separate directory. Meanwhile external links have absolute paths since they link to other sites, an external link would be written like with the "http://" and the "www" prefixes, as well as the domain ".com,.io,.ca,etc..." (<a href="http://www.youtube.com/">...</a>)
If the hyperlink links to an external link, then an absolute path should be used since the document isn't present on the same site. However, if the hyperlink links to an internal link, then a relative path should be used since the document is on the same site.
You can open links in external windows by adding the attribute (target= "blank) to the opening <a> tag.
You can navigate the document tree with links using the <a> tag referencing files specified through a relative path on the same site, linking to the documents where the pages are.
There are a bunch of CSS pseudo-selectors, they range from :link, which selects an unvisited link in its initial state, making it susceptible to styling. :visited links is another pseudo-selector enabling the selection of links after they've been clicked on or visited. :hover selects links or elements when the cursor hovers over them, styling it in that case. :active selects a link in the very brief state between clicking the link and it being :visited, this state can be prolonged by holding a mouse-click. :focus is the state when is focused on, mostly used in forms, after clicking on a link, or after tabbing to a link.
