Tables are used in HTML to display data in a legible and streamlined manner, the data must be intuitively appropriate to a grid-like presentation for the use of tables to be justified.

A structure of a table includes the following nested tags/elements, starting off with the <caption> element, which directly follows the opening <table> tag and is usually displayed at the top of the table by default. The <thead> element follows and signifies the header of the table, it follows the <caption> element and precedes the first <tr> element with <th> tags as child elements, defining the table's header. <tbody> element follows and it defines the body or the most important data of a table. Finally, the <tfoot> element comes at the end to signify the footer or the last section of a table. Within the <thead> element lives the first <tr> (table row) and has its own unique <th> elements (table headings, similar to an <h1> element), each <tr> has child elements of <td> to define the data in each table cell.

Combining multiple cells is possible using the colspan and rowspan attribute within the opening tags of either <td> or <th> elements. Its value is usually a number that defines how many of either columns or rows should be combined.

You should be careful when using padding and borders, because some elements add their own borders. So the border-collapse property should be used in CSS to specify what the table selector's borders look like, a border-collapse property can have a value of either separate (default), collapse (unifying all borders), or inherit. Hence, the care required when applying borders to a table. Moreover, when using padding on tables one should be careful as to what they're padding, and how that may affect how the data is displayed as well as the size of columns, rows and cells.

Text can be aligned within a cell using the text-align property in CSS, but that only aligns the data or text horizontally with the known values of center, left, and right. Moreover, text can be aligned using the vertical-align property, which has values of 
