# Why do exceptions add complexity?

An exception is a mechanism for a program to throw in the
case of an unaccounted for event that diverges from the default case.
An exception is caused by wrong config or bad arguments, resource or I/O
operation failure, packet loss in distributed systems, server latency or
response failure, or unexpected peer communication, or the code might
detect unexpected situations or inconsistencies that the system is not
equipped to handle. Exception handling is harder to write than normal
cases since they disrupt the code's flow. There are two approaches to
exception handling either retry or continue execution or secondly,
exit and report the exception upwards. In the second approach, state
consistency presents a challenge so rollbacks to the state prior to
the exception are a must. Exception handling could generate its own
set of exceptions. For example, in the case of a lost packet that is
resent, the packet could be just delayed and thus duplicate packets
could be sent, which also need to be handled. The handling of exceptions
needs to be stopped by the developer at some point in order to avoid
cascading exceptions being thrown from handled exceptions.

# What's wrong with classes with many exceptions?

Classes with many exceptions tend to add complexity to the interface
in addition to being shallower abstractions. To reduce complexity
of exception handling, the most obvious solution is to minimize
areas in code where exceptions are handled. The best solution to
alleviate exception handling complexity is to define errors out of
existence, in other words designing the API so it does not have any
exceptions to handle. Making software simpler with little exceptions
is key to minimizing bugs.

# What is exception masking?

Exception masking refers to the handling of an exception at the low-level
so that the software's higher levels are unaware of the exception. It is
another technique that helps reduce the areas where exceptions are handled.
It is most prevalent in distributed systems and pulls complexity downwards.

# What is exception aggregation?

Exception aggregation refers to a technique that reduces complexity where
many exceptions are handled in one place with a single piece of code (i.e a single handler).
Letting exceptions propagate up to higher levels of the software allows
them to be handled by a single handler rather than handling each thrown exception
in its place.

# What are the benefits of just failing?

Another technique to reduce complexity when it comes to exception handling
is to crash the program, mostly in the cases where a somewhat infrequent
exception is impossible or difficult to handle. When an application runs
out of potential memory to allocate, it makes sense for it to crash.
Antoher case would be I/O failure (i.e file read/write fail) or a network
socket fails to open.

# Why are special cases sometimes indicative of bad design?

Special cases should be designed out of existence much like exceptions in
order to reduce overall software complexity. This approach can be implemented
by designing the default case in a way that it handles special cases as well.
