# What are some software trends?

Object oriented programming is a software design pattern
based on classes, inheritance, polymorphism and encapsulation.
Interface inheritance concerns itself with method signature being
inherited from base to derived classes. Implementation inheritance
concerns itself with base classes defining default implementations
for derived classes. Implementation inheritance reduces change
amplification since an inherited implementation change takes
place in one place only. It also presents a problem of dependency
between classes where if a default implementation changes, would it
break functionality for derived classes.

# What is agile development?

Agile development emerged in the 90's and concerns itself more
with software development as opposed to software design. One of
the core principle of agile development is that development should
be incremental and iterative. One of the downsides is that it could
easily lead to tactical programming. While incremental development
is beneficial, increments should be increments of abstractions not features.

# How is testing done?

Unit tests are tests that validate a section of code in a single method.
They don't require setting up an environment to be run while integration tests do.
Integration tests ensure that different parts of the application are working
together as expected. Tests are important since they facilitate refactoring
and ensure no regression. TDD has the problem of orienting coding to features
rather than good design.
