# What are basic _design_ principles and what are the different styles of **typefaces**?

The first rule of _design_ is content is king. The main attributes affecting design are the _audience_, **tone** and **_purpose_**. For both **serif** and _sans-serif_ typefaces, there are classes of styles named _humanist_, **transitional**, **_modern_**, _Egyptian or slab_ for **serif**, and _humanist_, **transitional** and **_geometric_** for _sans-serif_. Lastly, _script_ **fonts** mimic handwriting and their use should be sparse as they come at a cost of legibility. You also shouldn't match fonts with same **typefaces** and _class_ or same **typefaces** as they clash. In typography, contrast beats harmony. A header with a **serif** font paired with a _sans-serif_ body, both possibly having the same styles (_humanist_, **transitional**, etc...) should look more elegant.

## How can you establish **visual hierarchy** using different sizes for text and content?

You should start by setting body copy size, often `16px` is the most commonly used. Next up, you set the header copy, which its size ranges from `200%` to `300%`, second heading could be around `150%` and smaller copy around `75%`. Line height is another factor to consider, `120%` to `150%` is a good range, but setting `line-height: 1.5;` in **CSS** ensures `150%` regardless of font size. Line-widths measuring unit is characters per line, 55 to 65 CPL is often a good legible range. To control line-width, `max-width` limits CPL when set in **CSS** on text. Lastly, you should save widows and orphans, the former being a single word on a line, and the latter a single line in a column, separate from the rest of its paragraph.

# What are the types of **colors** and how can you efficiently apply **colors** with _design_?

The two types of **colors** are _subtractive_ and **additive**. The former describes analog colors, and their spectrum consists of Cyan, Magenta and Yellow, mixing them gives black, which are the **colors** of printer cartridges. The latter's spectrum consists of RGB, mixing them gives white. **Additive colors** are digital **colors** that have no tangible utility. Moreover, humans perceive color in different terms denoted as **HSL**, namely _Hue_, **saturation** and **_lightness_**. _Hue's_ representation is a circle with degree angles defining the colors, `0` denotes red, `120deg` green and `240deg` blue. **Saturation** goes from `0` to `100%` with the latter giving the most vibrant form of a _hue_, and the former giving gray. **_Lightness_** is also given by percentages, with `100%` giving white, `0` giving black and `50%` gives the most vibrant form a _hue_.

## How can you build a color scheme?

You start off by picking a base color, which the rest of the scheme will follow. A monochromatic color scheme keeps the _hue_ constant and uses **saturation** and **_lightness_** for variations on that _hue_. An analogous color scheme has an increasing _hue_ with **saturation** and **_lightness_** values also changing. A complementary color scheme has two opposite _hue_ values denoting it, again with variations on **saturation** and **_lightness_** values.
