# What are the essential rules of typography?

Body text is the most important component of a document as it makes up most of the page. In print, the most comfortable range for body text is `10-12 points` whereas on the web, it ranges from `20-25 px`. Line spacing is the vertical distance between lines, its comfortable range is around `120-145%` of the point size specified by the **CSS** property of `line-height`. Line length is the horizontal width of the text block, the comfortable range is an average of `45-90 characters` per line. Selecting a professional font instead of default system fonts is the quickest way to improve how a document looks. Use curly quotation marks instead of straight ones. Avoid using word spaces or more than one white space characters in a row. Never underline unless it's a hyperlink. Center text and use bold and italic sparingly. It's fine to use all caps for less than one line of text, an extra of `5-12%` of letter spacing should apply to all caps and small caps. Use ampersands sparingly unless in a specific name. Use first-line indents that are 1-4 times the point size of the text or use 4-10 points of space between paragraphs but not both. Don't confuse hyphens and dashes and don't chain hyphens to make a dash. In a document longer than 3 pages, one exclamation mark is plenty. Use proper trademark and copyright symbols. Make sure apostrophes point downward. Make ellipses using the proper character not periods and spaces. Put a nonbreaking space after a paragraph and section marks. Make sure foot and inch marks are straight, not curly.